Project 2 (#195)
RoboJackets/software-training: projects/week_2/Instructions.md

## 3 Instructions

### 3.1 Create new files

You'll be implementing the two steps of this project, color detection and re-projection, as new fuctions defined in separate files from the node's main file. The first thing we need to do is add these files to our package.

Go to the ["src" folder](../../obstacle_detector/src), in the obstacle_detector package. Add two new files: "student_functions.cpp" and "student_functions.hpp".

In the implementation file (student_functions.cpp), we need to include our new header file. Add an include statement at the top of the file to include the header file we just created.

<details>
<summary><b>Hint:</b> How to include a header</summary>
<p>To include a header file named "my_header.hpp", we'd write the code below. Note that the use of quotes ("") instead of angle brackets (<>) indicates that this header is part of our current package.</p>
<code>#include "my_header.hpp"</code>
</details>

In our new header file (student_functions.hpp), we need to add header guards. Add the three lines that define the header guards for this file. Remember that header guards look like this:

> ```c++

Reviewer: We should check with teams. IDK if they are using this or #pragma once

Author: The teams use a mix. I can add `#pragma once` to the recitation guide. All of the training code and videos sticks to guards.

Reviewer: We can leave that to the teams then

#ifndef STUDENT_FUNCTIONS_HPP  // Check that the unique macro has not already been defined
#define STUDENT_FUNCTIONS_HPP  // Define the unique macro

#endif  // Close the pre-processor if block
```

Finally, to include our new files into our package's build rules, we need to edit obstacle_detector's [CMakeLists.txt](../../obstacle_detector/CMakeLists.txt).

Find the student code block in the call to `add_library`. Add our new implementation file, `src/student_code.cpp` to this function call.

> **Note:** We don't need to add our header file, because it gets compiled as part of the files that include it. Most C++ projects omit header files from the build rules unless there are special technical reasons that require them to be there.

Reviewer: I can go either way, but is the second sentence ever going to come up in training? It feels like extra information that may not be important.

Author: Doesn't come up in training, but does come up in some team code when they're using Qt.

Reviewer: Should we just remove it then?

Author: Removed.

### 3.2 Declare functions

Let's now declare the two functions we'll be creating for this project. First, because our functions will be using objects from the [OpenCV library](https://opencv.org/) for computer vision, we need to include a header from that library.

Add an include directive for "opencv2/opencv.hpp". Remember that all code in our header file should go inside of the header guard if block (between `#define` and `#endif`).

**Tip:** Because the OpenCV library is not part of our package, this include directive should use the angle bracket style.

Next, add the declaration for our first function. This function should be named `FindColors`. Its return type should be `cv::Mat`, and it should take the following parameters:

1. A constant `cv::Mat` named `input`
1. A constant `cv::Scalar` named `range_min`
1. A constant `cv::Scalar` named `range_max`

Finally, add the declaration for our second function. This function should be named `ReprojectToGroundPlane`. Its return type should be `cv::Mat`, and it should take these parameters:

1. A constant `cv::Mat` named `input`
1. A constant `cv::Mat` named `homography`
1. A constant `cv::Size` named `map_size`

> ### 3.3 Implement `FindColors`

Reviewer: If there are some bolded headings here that would be nice. This section is pretty long and hard to parse.

Author: I'll break it into two sections. One will cover the color space background and conversion and the other will do the range checking.

Author: I ended up also moving the couple of paragraphs about color spaces up into the background section.

![The HSV cylinder](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/33/HSV_color_solid_cylinder_saturation_gray.png/320px-HSV_color_solid_cylinder_saturation_gray.png)

Thus, our implementation of `FindColors` will use two steps: convert our input image to the HSV color space then populate a single-channel output image based on the HSV value at each pixel. We'll start by opening up [student_functions.cpp](../../obstacle_detector/src/student_functions.cpp) and adding an empty definition for `FindColors`:

```c++
cv::Mat FindColors(const cv::Mat input, const cv::Scalar range_min, const cv::Scalar range_max)
{
}
```

Now declare a variable to hold the HSV version of our input image. This should be a `cv::Mat` variable called `input_hsv`. Then, call the `cvtColor` function from OpenCV to do the conversion to HSV:

```c++
cv::Mat input_hsv;
cv::cvtColor(input, input_hsv, cv::COLOR_BGR2HSV);
```

Note that the conversion type uses "BGR". This color space uses the same channels as RGB, just in the opposite order in the image data. OpenCV uses BGR as the default color space for color images.

> Next, declare another `cv::Mat` variable that will hold our output image, named `outupt`. We'll initialise this variable to be the same size as our input image while holding one channel of unsigned, 8-bit values.

Reviewer 2: typos
```suggestion
Next, declare another `cv::Mat` variable that will hold our output image, named `output`. We'll initialize this variable to be the same size as our input image while holding one channel of unsigned, 8-bit values.
```

> Next, declare another `cv::Mat` variable that will hold our output image, named `output`. We'll initialize this variable to be the same size as our input image while holding one channel of unsigned, 8-bit values.

Reviewer: Do we talk about what an unsigned bit is in the C++ videos? I know we don't in the robotics side.

Author: Yes, they get mentioned in the C++ videos

```c++
input_color[0] >= range_min[0] && input_color[0] <= range_max[0]
```

Create an if statement that checks if all three channels of `input_color` are within our target range. Inside the body of this if statment, set the current position of our output image to 255:

```c++
output.at<uint8_t>(r,c) = 255;
```

Add an else block to our if statement. In this branch, set the output value to 0.

Finally, after the end of the nested loops, return our `output` image.

### 3.4 Implement `ReprojectToGroundPlane`

`ReprojectToGroundPlane` warps `input` using the homography defined by the `homography` matrix. This function will create an output image with the size given by `map_size`. It will then iterate over each pixel position in the output image and calculate the corresponding pixel position in the input image with the homography matrix. Finally, it copies the value from the source position in the source image to the destination position in the output image. Any pixels that get mapped outside of the bounds of the source image will be set to 127 in the output image.

> Let's start by declaring our output image variable. We'll call it `output` and use `cv::Mat` as its type. Initialize it by passing `map_size` and `CV_8UC1` to its constructor. `map_size` just holds the desired height and width for our output image. `CV_8UC1` tells OpenCV that this image will have one channel of unsigned, 8-bit values. (Our color images so far have been using `CV_8UC3` to store three channels of unsigned, 8-bit values).

Reviewer: bits are explained better here then when they are first mentioned.

Author: Moved this explanation up to the first use of `CV_8UC1`.

Next, setup two nested loops to iterate over all pixel positions in `output`. The first loop should iterate from `y = 0` to `y = output.rows-1`. The second loop should iterator from `x = 0` to `x = output.cols-1`.

In the body of our inner nested loop, we're going do these steps:

> 1. Create a homogeneous point for our current output position

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a link explaining why homogeneous coordinates are used?

Author: @JasonGibson274 iirc we're explaining homogeneous coordinates in the videos, right?

Reviewer: In week 1 we mention that homogenous coordinates augments the vector with a 1. The recitation guide will have a better explanation with why that's a reasonable thing to do in week 1. So I think something as simple as a reminder to just add a one to the end of the vector should cover this.

I'll likely have an exercise in week 2 for further practice.

Author: Is [line 191](https://github.com/RoboJackets/software-training/pull/195/files#diff-40f8c92533a4fd9d22102627724f23c8350eb7a775f45bc2ebd48a2bfbffbd22R191) enough, or should it be more explicit?

> Start by declaring a constant `cv::Vec3d` named `dest_vec`. Initialize it by passing `x`, `y`, and `1` to the constructor.

Now we have the source and destination points. We just need to check if our source point is actually within the bounds of our source image. `cv::Point2i` gives us the `inside` function that can tell us if the given point is within a `cv::Rect` rectangle. We can create a `cv::Rect` from our input image with `cv::Rect(cv::Point(), input.size())`. Set up an if statement that checks the result of calling `inside` on `src_point` with the `cv::Rect` just described.

Inside of the if statement, copy the value from `input` to `output`:

```c++
output.at<uint8_t>(dest_point) = input.at<uint8_t>(src_point);
```

Add an else branch that sets the output location to 127:

```c++
output.at<uint8_t>(dest_point) = 127;
```

Finally, after the end of both nested loops, return `output`.

### 3.5 Call our functions in `ObstacleDetector`

Both of our key functions are now implemented, so it's time to use them by calling them within `ObstacleDetector`. In [obstacle_detector.cpp](../../obstacle_detector/src/obstacle_detector.cpp), find the student code comment block at the end of the existing set of `#include` lines. Add an `#include` line for your header, "student_functions.hpp".

> Nest, find the student code comments that include `// Call FindColors()`. Within that comment block, you'll see a declared but uninitialized variable named `detected_colors`. Add an initializer for this variable that calls `FindColors`. The input image for `FindColors` is `cv_image->image`, and the color range is given by `min_color` and `max_color`.

Reviewer 2: typo.
```suggestion
Next, find the student code comments that include `// Call FindColors()`. Within that comment block, you'll see a declared but uninitialized variable named `detected_colors`. Add an initializer for this variable that calls `FindColors`. The input image for `FindColors` is `cv_image->image`, and the color range is given by `min_color` and `max_color`.
```
